[docs] [CDCSDK] Documentation for CDC GA (#15225)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/change-data-capture/debezium-connector-yugabytedb.md

{{< tip title="Use transformers" >}}

We recommend adding a transformer in the source connector while using with before image, the below property can be added to your configuration directly:

```properties
...
"transforms":"unwrap",
"transforms.unwrap.type":"io.debezium.connector.yugabytedb.transforms.PGCompatible",
"transforms.unwrap.drop.tombstones":"false",
...
```

Additionally, you will need another transformer in the sink connectors:

```properties
...
"transforms":"unwrap",
"transforms.unwrap.type":"io.debezium.transforms.ExtractNewRecordState",
"transforms.unwrap.drop.tombstones":"false",
...
```

{{< /tip >}}

Once before image is enabled and the mentioned transformer is used, the effect of an update statement with the record structure would be:

```sql
UPDATE customers SET email = 'service@example.com' WHERE id = 1;
```

```output.json
{
  "schema": {...},
  "payload": {
    "before": { --> 1
      "id": 1,
      "name": "Vaibhav Kushwaha",
      "email": "vaibhav@example.com"
    }
    "after": { --> 2
      "id": 1,
      "name": "Vaibhav Kushwaha",
      "email": "service@example.com"
    },
    "source": { --> 3

>       "version": "1.7.0-SNAPSHOT",

Author: Nope, I will update, although this may change depending on the version being used.

By default, a connector's `tombstones.on.delete` property is set to `true` so that the connector generates a tombstone after each delete event.

If you set the property to `false` to prevent the connector from saving tombstone records to Kafka topics, the **absence of tombstone records might lead to unintended consequences if your sink is not designed to handle it properly**. For example, Kafka relies on tombstones during log compaction to remove records related to deleted keys.

## Before image

[Before image](../#before-image) refers to the state of the row _before_ the change event occurred. The YugabyteDB connector sends the before image of the row when it will be configured using a stream ID enabled with before image. For more information about how to create the stream ID for a before image, see [yb-admin](../../../admin/yb-admin/#change-data-capture-cdc-commands).

{{< tip title="Use transformers" >}}

> It is recommend to add a transformer in the source connector while using with before image; the following property can be added to your configuration directly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a transformer in the source connector while using with before image; you can add the following property directly to your configuration:
```

To avoid this problem when you're using a schema registry, use the `YBExtractNewRecordState` SMT (Single Message Transformer for Kafka), which interprets these values and sends the record in the correct format (by removing the unmodified columns from the JSON message). Records transformed by `YBExtractNewRecordState` are compatible with all sink implementations. This approach ensures that the schema doesn't change with each new record and it can work with a schema registry.

#### ExtractTopic

Transformer type: `io.aiven.kafka.connect.transforms.ExtractTopic`

> This transformer extracts a string value from the record and use it as the topic name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This transformer extracts a string value from the record and uses it as the topic name.
```

The transformation can use either the whole key or value (in this case, it must have `INT8`, `INT16`, `INT32`, `INT64`, `FLOAT32`, `FLOAT32`, `BOOLEAN`, or `STRING` type) or a field in them (in this case, it must have `STRUCT` type and the field's value must be `INT8`, `INT16`, `INT32`, `INT64`, `FLOAT32`, `FLOAT32`, `BOOLEAN`, or `STRING`).

ExtractTopic exists in two variants:

* `io.aiven.kafka.connect.transforms.ExtractTopic$Key` - works on keys
* `io.aiven.kafka.connect.transforms.ExtractTopic$Value` - works on values

The transformation defines the following configurations:

* `field.name` - The name of the field which should be used as the topic name. If `null` or empty, the entire key or value is used (and assumed to be a string). By default is `null`.
* `skip.missing.or.null` - In case the source of the new topic name is `null` or missing, should a record be silently passed without transformation. By default, is `false`.

Here is an example of this transformation configuration:

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```properties
````

...
```

#### PGCompatible SMT

Transformer type: `io.debezium.connector.yugabytedb.transforms.PGCompatible`

By default, the YugabyteDB CDC service publishes events with a schema that only includes columns that have been modified. The source connector then sends the value as `null` for columns that are missing in the payload. Each column payload includes a `set` field that is used to signal if a column has been set to `null` because it wasn't present in the payload from YugabyteDB.

However, some sink connectors may not understand the preceding format. `PGCompatible` transforms the payload to a format that is compatible with the format of the standard change data events. Specifically, it transforms column schema and value to remove the set field and collapse the payload such that it only contains the data type schema and value.

PGCompatible differs from `YBExtractNewRecordState` by recursively modifying all the fields in a payload.

### AVRO serialization

The YugabyteDB source connector also supports AVRO serialization with schema registry. To use AVRO serialization, simply add the following configuration to your connector:

> ```output.json

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```json
````

| tombstones.on.delete | `true` | Controls whether a delete event is followed by a tombstone event.<br/><br/> `true` - a delete operation is represented by a delete event and a subsequent tombstone event.<br/><br/> `false` - only a delete event is emitted.<br/><br/> After a source record is deleted, emitting a tombstone event (the default behavior) allows Kafka to completely delete all events that pertain to the key of the deleted row in case log compaction is enabled for the topic. |
| auto.add.new.tables | `true` | Controls whether the connector should keep polling the server to check if any new table has been added to the configured change data stream ID. If a new table has been found in the stream ID and if it has been included in the `table.include.list`, the connector will be restarted automatically. |
| new.table.poll.interval.ms | 300000 | The interval at which the poller thread will poll the server to check if there are any new tables in the configured change data stream ID. |

### Monitoring status of the deployed connector

You can use the rest APIs to monitor your deployed connectors.

> 1. Get the list of all connectors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Get the list of all connectors using the following command:
```

   ```sh
   curl -X GET localhost:8083/connectors/
   ```

> 2. Get the configuration of a connector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Get the configuration of a connector using the following command:
```

   ```sh
   curl -X GET localhost:8083/connectors/<connector-name>
   ```

> 3. Get the list of tasks with their configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Get the list of tasks with their configuration using the following command:
```

   ```sh
   curl -X GET localhost:8083/connectors/<connector-name>/tasks
   ```

>    Additionally, you can also view the status of one task by providing its task ID:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Additionally, you can also view the status of one task by providing its task ID as follows:
```

   ```sh
   curl -X GET localhost:8083/connectors/<connector-name>/tasks/<task-id>
   ```

> 4. Get the status of the connector with the status of its tasks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Get the status of the connector with the status of its tasks using the following command:
```

   ```sh
   curl -X GET localhost:8083/connectors/<connector-name>/status
   ```

## Monitoring

> The YugabyteDB source connector provides two types of metrics that are in addition to the built-in support for JMX metrics that Zookeeper, Kafka, and Kafka Connect provide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The YugabyteDB source connector provides two types of metrics in addition to the built-in support for JMX metrics that Zookeeper, Kafka, and Kafka Connect provide.
```

* Snapshot metrics provide information about connector operation while performing a snapshot.
* Streaming metrics provide information about connector operation when the connector is capturing changes and streaming change event records.

### Snapshot metrics

The **MBean** is `debezium.yugabytedb:type=connector-metrics,server=<database.server.name>,task=<task.id>,context=snapshot`.

Snapshot metrics are not exposed unless a snapshot operation is active, or if a snapshot has occurred since the last connector start. The following table lists the shapshot metrics that are available.

| Metric name | Type | Description |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| LastEvent | `string` | The last snapshot event that the connector has read. |
| MilliSecondsSinceLastEvent | `long` | The number of milliseconds since the connector has read and processed the most recent event. |

> | TotalNumberOfEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of events that this connector has seen since last started or reset. |

Reviewer: Just making this match the equivalent in the next section...
```suggestion
| TotalNumberOfEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
```

| NumberOfEventsFiltered | `long` | The number of events that have been filtered by include/exclude list filtering rules configured on the connector. |

> | QueueTotalCapacity | `int` | The length the queue used to pass events between the snapshotter and the main Kafka Connect loop. |

Author: It is number of events.

> | QueueTotalCapacity | `int` | The length the queue used to pass events between the snapshotter and the main Kafka Connect loop. |

Author: "The length the queue..." is correct btw :)

The meaning will change if I apply the suggested change.

| CurrentQueueSizeInBytes | `long` | The current volume, in bytes, of records in the queue. |

### Streaming metrics

The **MBean** is `debezium.yugabytedb:type=connector-metrics,server=<database.server.name>,task=<task.id>,context=streaming`.

The following table lists the streaming metrics that are available.

| Metric name | Type | Description |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| LastEvent | `string` | The last streaming event that the connector has read. |
| MilliSecondsSinceLastEvent | `long` | The number of milliseconds since the connector has read and processed the most recent event. |
| TotalNumberOfEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
| TotalNumberOfCreateEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of create events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
| TotalNumberOfUpdateEventsSeen | `long` |The total number of update events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
| TotalNumberOfDeleteEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of delete events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |

> | NumberOfEventsFiltered | `long` | The number of events that have been filtered by include/exclude list filtering rules configured on the connector. |

Reviewer: Is this also "since the last start or metrics reset", or is there some other time boundary?

Author: It is the same.

> | QueueTotalCapacity | `int` | The length the queue used to pass events between the streamer and the main Kafka Connect loop. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| QueueTotalCapacity | `int` | The length of the queue used to pass events between the streamer and the main Kafka Connect loop. |
```

Author: It will be the same, the change is not required. read it again :)

| QueueRemainingCapacity | `int` | The free capacity of the queue used to pass events between the streamer and the main Kafka Connect loop. |

> | Connected | `boolean` | Flag that denotes whether the connector is currently connected to the database server. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Connected | `boolean` | Indicates whether the connector is currently connected to the database server. |
```

> | MilliSecondsBehindSource | `long` | The number of milliseconds between the last change event’s timestamp and the connector processing it. The values will incoporate any differences between the clocks on the machines where the database server and the connector are running. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| MilliSecondsBehindSource | `long` | The number of milliseconds between the last change event’s timestamp and when the connector processed it. The value incorporates any differences between the clocks on the machines where the database server and the connector are running. |
```

| SourceEventPosition | `Map<String, String>` | The coordinates of the last received event. |
| LastTransactionId | `string` | Transaction identifier of the last processed transaction. |
| MaxQueueSizeInBytes | `long` | The maximum buffer of the queue in bytes. This metric is available if `max.queue.size.in.bytes` is set to a positive long value. |
| CurrentQueueSizeInBytes | `long` | The current volume, in bytes, of records in the queue. |

## Usage examples

> For examples on how to configure CDC in different setup configurations, you can see our [list of examples on GitHub](https://github.com/yugabyte/cdc-examples) for usage with various sinks and configuration information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For examples on how to configure CDC in different setup configurations, refer to the list of [CDC examples] on GitHub(https://github.com/yugabyte/cdc-examples) for usage with various sinks and configuration information.
```

> For examples on how to configure CDC in different setup configurations, you can see our [list of examples on GitHub](https://github.com/yugabyte/cdc-examples) for usage with various sinks and configuration information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For examples of how to configure CDC in different setup configurations, see the [list of examples on GitHub](https://github.com/yugabyte/cdc-examples) for usage with various sinks and configuration information.

```

Author: Addressed the comment from @aishwarya24 on this line.

| CurrentQueueSizeInBytes | `long` | The current volume, in bytes, of records in the queue. |

### Streaming metrics

The **MBean** is `debezium.yugabytedb:type=connector-metrics,server=<database.server.name>,task=<task.id>,context=streaming`.

The following streaming metrics are available:

| Metric name | Type | Description |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| LastEvent | `string` | The last streaming event that the connector has read. |
| MilliSecondsSinceLastEvent | `long` | The number of milliseconds since the connector has read and processed the most recent event. |
| TotalNumberOfEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
| TotalNumberOfCreateEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of create events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
| TotalNumberOfUpdateEventsSeen | `long` |The total number of update events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |
| TotalNumberOfDeleteEventsSeen | `long` | The total number of delete events that this connector has seen since the last start or metrics reset. |

> | NumberOfEventsFiltered | `long` | The number of events that have been filtered by include/exclude list filtering rules configured on the connector. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| NumberOfEventsFiltered | `long` | The total number of events (since the last start or metrics reset) that have been filtered by include/exclude list filtering rules configured on the connector. |
```
